{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2757
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Module 12: Problem Solving Objectives To introduce problem solving and its potential use in psychotherapy To learn how to apply problem-solving skills during Brief CBT What is problem solving, and why is it important in therapy? Problem-solving techniques generally involve a process by which an individual attempts to identify effective means of coping with problems of everyday living. This often involves a set of steps for analyzing a problem, identifying options for coping, evaluating the options, deciding upon a plan, and developing strategies for implementing the plan. Problem-solving strategies can be used with a wide range of problems, including depression, anxiety, anger and aggression, stress management, coping with medical illness, addiction, and relationship/family difficulties. Problem-solving techniques teach skills that aid the patient in feeling increased control over life issues that previously felt overwhelming or unmanageable. In this manner, problem solving can help with practical problem resolution as well as emotion-focused coping (e.g., increasing control, decreasing stress, and increasing hopefulness). When? (Indications/Contraindications) Thoughts and beliefs are challenged when a thought or belief is not true or a situation is unchangeable. Alternatively, problem solving may be used when the root of an issue is a changeable situation; and the thoughts associated with the noxious situation might be accurate. Problem solving can be especially effective when a specific problem is able to be addressed and operationalized. A specific operationalized problem is one that is easily explained, identified, and/or measured. Problem solving works best when a practical solution is available. For example, a patient complaining of social isolation likely has potential solutions to this difficulty (e.g., calling a friend, joining a group, engaging in a socially driven hobby). Examples of problems appropriate for problem solving include: 1) How to communicate with a partner about a difficult issue 2) How best to cope with the functional limitations of a medical condition 3) How to reduce financial distress Note that you are not responsible for finding answers to these questions but rather should aid the patient in finding his or her own answers. In this manner you are a facilitator who possesses problem-solving skills. Problem solving may be difficult for the following individuals: 1) Persons with serious mental illness (psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder) 2) Persons with severe depression, who might require more focused cognitive work or medications 3) Persons who have difficulty thinking about long-term effects (e.g., persons with cognitive impairment) 4) Persons with problems that are largely emotional; for example, a person who feels incompetent at work and often feels that others are overly critical may be 67 reacting to emotions (e.g., depression). This problem may be better served using another skill (e.g., maladaptive thoughts module). How? (Instructions/Handouts) Problem-Solving Therapy (PST) In problem-solving therapy, it is important that you first educate the patient about the problem-solving strategies that will be used during sessions. To enable the patient to use the strategies after therapy ends, teach him/her to carefully examine a problem, create a list of solutions, and make decisions about which strategies are appropriate for a variety of problems. General guidelines for using problem-solving strategies are as follows: Training should be tailored and specific to each patient. Obtain a thorough assessment of the problem before proceeding with problemsolving therapy. Encourage the patient to try as many solutions as possible. Decide whether the patient requires more problem-solving work or more emotional work to experience growth through the therapeutic process. Strategies for Effective Problem Solving The SOLVED technique helps guide you through the steps to most effectively identify and solve problems in your life. S (Selecting a Problem) \'85 the patient would like to solve. Ask the patient to think about situations when he or she feels distress or difficulty problem solving. If planning does not seem to be possible, suggest a different therapeutic technique (e.g., changing maladaptive thoughts). The decision to remain with problem solving or move to a different skill is largely dependent on you to direct. O (Opening Your Mind to All Solutions) Here, it is important to be as broad as possible. You are encouraged to work with patients to \'93brainstorm\'94 all possible solutions. Writing may be particularly helpful for some patients. Even ideas that seem ridiculous at first may generate realistic solutions. For example, Bertha\'92s family would often drop by several times a week without calling beforehand and expect her to care for their children. She enjoyed this, but felt tired many times and was beginning to get concerned about her ability to continue child sitting at such a frequent pace. Her first idea was to tell them she could no longer baby-sit. Although she did not like this idea, it led her to consider related ideas, such as telling them they had to call beforehand to make sure she felt up to the task. Tips for generating possible solutions: \'95 Ask the patient to think about advice he or she would give someone else with this problem. \'95 Ask the patient to examine the ways he or she have handled similar situations. \'95 Instruct the patient to consult with a close friend or relative for additional solutions. 68 L (Listing the Potential Pros and Cons of Each Potential Solution) Often, writing options, along with listing pros and cons, can be helpful in considering potential options. Writing allows additional thought, as well as a visual image of options. Recommend that patients consider solutions in a logical manner, thus reducing the time spent ruminating. It may also help to identify additional thoughts that might benefit from changes using the techniques, such as changing thoughts. In some cases, identification of pros/cons may require obtaining information from other people, such as lawyers or financial advisors. V (Verifying the Best Solution) Examine the pros and cons of the solutions listed. Patients may wish to \'93rank order\'94 the solutions based on which solutions are most practical and/or desirable. E (Enacting the Plan) Identify the steps needed to carry out the solution selected. Patients may need to break actions down into steps small enough to facilitate achievement of goals. Once you and the patient finish formulating a specific plan, encourage the patient to carry it out. D (Deciding if the Plan Worked) Follow-up with the patient to see how well the chosen solution actually worked. If the solution was effective, give positive reinforcement. If the solution was not effective, return to the first step in the SOLVED technique to specify a new problem or move to \'93O\'94 or \'93L\'94 to identify other goals or potential solutions for the same problem. The decision to move back and to which step is largely up to you, who might now have additional information about pros and cons and possible solutions. Problem-Solving Examples To facilitate patient learning, you might wish to provide examples of the SOLVED program at work. The following section provides several examples of the SOLVED technique. Examples of Specifying the Problem in SOLVED: Common Problems in Chronic Illness Emotional/Social/Relationship Problems Managing Mood Difficulty Asking for Help Difficulty Communicating Marital Stress Family Stress **To effectively use the SOLVED technique, problems may need to be more specific than those listed above. Physical/Symptom Problems Overcoming or Working With Physical Limitations Medication Adherence Issues Transportation and Mobility Issues Minimizing Influence of Symptoms Minimizing Influence of Medication Side-Effects 69 Opening Your Mind Through Brainstorming to Solve Problems through SOLVED SELECT A SPECIFIC PROBLEM: Minimizing Effect of Symptoms OPEN your MIND to ALL possible SOLUTIONS 1. Talk to your doctor. 2. Change or modify medications. 3. Engage in healthy life choices, including proper diet and exercise. 4. Educate yourself by talking to others and by reading about your illness. 5. Explore alternative treatments. SELECT A SPECIFIC PROBLEM: Forgetting to Take Medications OPEN your MIND to ALL possible SOLUTIONS 1. Turn several alarm clocks on to remind you. 2. Put your medication in a place you will notice it at the time you are supposed to take it. 3. Have a friend or family member remind you. 4. Buy a medication dispenser to help you remember whether you have taken the medication. 5. Take it at the same time every day. Other examples of problem-solving worksheets are listed at the end of this module. These worksheets expand the common pros and cons lists to help a patient consider multiple perspectives and outcomes before making a decision. Homework Examples: 1. Create a list of possible solutions to your identified problem (brainstorm). 2. Implement your identified solution, assess it effectiveness, and modify as necessary.}