{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2757
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Sample Brief CBT Outline #1 Patient Description Maria is a 60-year-old airline pilot who is about to retire from 15 years of flying. Maria was diagnosed with Type II diabetes 5 years ago and has had difficulties maintaining her health since that time. She has suffered bouts of severe fatigue and dizziness. Maria says that flying is her \'93first love,\'94 but that it has become increasingly dangerous for her to fly. She states that she \'93feels like a failure\'94 because she worked so hard to become a pilot and now \'93it is over.\'94 Maria says that she is usually a very active person but has lost interest in her hobbies and doesn\'92t have the energy to do them, anyway. She says that her depression has been worsened by her deteriorating health. Case Conceptualization: Maria is experiencing depression in response to a diagnosis of diabetes. She is unsure how to change her thoughts and behaviors to adjust to her new medical condition. Therapy will aid her adjustment by targeting dysfunctional thoughts about being a \'93failure\'94 and exploring and increasing the things that she enjoys and feels a sense of achievement from, both for work and recreation. Goals Behavioral Activation Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs Challenging Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs Session 1 Establish relationship. Identify Maria\'92s presenting problem. Introduce Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. Introduce the Cognitive-Behavioral Model. Describe Problem in Context of Model. Set Goals. Receive Feedback from Maria. Session 2 Check Mood. Introduce Behavioral Activation, and Explore Potential Activities to Improve Mood. Set Homework: Mood and Activity Tracking. Receive Feedback From Maria. Session 3 Check Mood. Review Mood and Activity Tracking. Use Tracking Sheet to Plan Where and What Behavioral Activation Will Be Employed. Troubleshoot Completing Activity. Assign Homework: 1 Behavioral-Activation Exercise. Receive Feedback From Maria. 115 Session 4 Check Mood. Review Behavioral Activation, Introduce Three-Column Thought Record and Idea of \'93Hot Thought.\'94 Practice Three Column With Event From Past Week. Homework: 1 behavioral activation 1 three-column thought record Receive Feedback From Maria. Session 5 Check Mood. Discuss Progress of Therapy and Termination. Review Homework. Introduce Cognitive Distortions. Complete Three-Column in Session, and Have Maria Identify Hot Thought. Introduce Concept of Challenging Hot Thought. Homework: 1 behavioral activation 1 three-column thought record Receive Feedback From Maria. Session 6 Check Mood. Review Homework. Introduce Challenging Thoughts and Seven-Column Thought Record. Complete Seven-Column in Session. Introduce Concept of Challenging Hot Thought. Homework: 1 behavioral activation 1 three-column thought record Receive Feedback From Maria. Session 7 Check Mood. Review Homework. Complete Seven-Column in Session (With Maria Writing and Talking Through asSshe Completes It) Homework: 1 behavioral activation 1 seven-column thought record Receive Feedback From Maria. Session 8 Check Mood. Review Homework. Review Progress of Treatment. Complete Relapse Prevention. Introduce and Schedule Self-Management Sessions. Homework: Self-Management Session 116 Sample Brief CBT Outline #2 Patient Description James is a 24-year-old college student on a full academic scholarship. He called the therapist to discuss his feelings of anxiety and whether there is anything that can help him \'93calm his nerves.\'94 James said that he is used to getting anxious in certain situations, but that it is starting to affect all areas of his life. He says that he doesn\'92t have a girlfriend because he gets \'93too freaked out\'94 to ask anyone on a date. He also says that his anxiety is starting to affect his grades because he gets so nervous during exams that he breaks into a cold sweat and cannot concentrate. He wants to be able to control his anxiety but feels there is no hope. Case Conceptualization: James is experiencing cognitive and physiological anxiety in response to evaluative situations. Therapy will focus on stress-management skills for his physiological symptoms and identifying dysfunctional thoughts or worries about his performance in academic and social situations. Specifically, therapy will identify catastrophic thoughts he has about failure. Goals Relaxation Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs Challenging Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs Session 1 Establish relationship. Identify James\'92 presenting problem. Introduce cognitive behavioral therapy. Introduce the cognitive-behavioral model. Describe problem in context of mode. Set goals. Receive feedback from James. Session 2 Check mood. Introduce and practice progressive muscle relaxation. Set homework: Plan two times during week to practice progressive muscle relaxation. Receive feedback from James. Session 3 Check mood. Review progressive muscle relaxation. Introduce and practice imagery. Homework: 1 progressive muscle relaxation 1 imagery exercise Receive feedback from James. 117 Session 4 Check mood. Review imagery. Introduce three-column thought record and idea of \'93hot thought.\'94 Practice three-column with event from past week. Homework: 1 relaxation technique 1 three-column thought record Receive feedback from James. Session 5 Check mood. Discuss progress of therapy and termination. Review homework. Introduce cognitive distortions. Complete three-column in session, and have James identify hot thought. Introduce concept of challenging hot thought. Homework: 2 relaxation techniques 1 three-column thought record Receive feedback from James. Session 6 Check mood. Review homework. Introduce challenging thoughts and seven-column thought record. Complete seven-column in session. Introduce concept of challenging hot thought. Homework: 2 relaxation techniques 1 three-column thought record Receive feedback from James. Session 7 Check mood. Review homework. Complete seven-column in session. Homework: 2 relaxation techniques 1 seven-column thought record Receive feedback from James. Session 8 Check mood. Review homework. Review progress of treatment. Complete relapse prevention. Introduce and schedule self-management sessions. Homework: self-management session}