{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2757
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Module 7: Agenda Setting Objectives \'95 To understand the rationale for setting an agenda \'95 To understand process of collaboratively setting an agenda \'95 To identify and address problems with setting an agenda What is agenda setting, and why is important? Agenda setting is a collaborative process through which the therapist and patient decide how session time will be spent. The patient and therapist offer items they would like to discuss and then decide the order of items and the amount of time they will spend on each. Each item should be in service of treatment goals (see Module 6: Goal Setting and Module 4: Cognitive Behavioral Case Conceptualization and Treatment Planning). Agenda setting ensures session that time is well spent and that both therapist and patient have input into session content. When? (Indications/Contraindications) An agenda should be set within the first 10 minutes of every session. Without setting an agenda, it is very easy for vocal patients to "run away" with the session by recounting the events of the past week or describing the history of a problem. It is also easy for more passive patients to never indicate which items are most important to them. By collaboratively setting an agenda, both the therapist and patient's needs are met. Setting a time limit for each item, increases the chance all items can be covered. Patients should be encouraged to think between sessions about what they would like to discuss in session. If a patient does not offer an agenda item, you can introduce an item and check with the patient to see if he or she feels it would be valuable to discuss. How? (Instructions/Handouts) It is your responsibility to model how to set agendas for the patient. In the first few sessions, you will be setting the agenda because often the patient is unsure of what is being asked or what to discuss in therapy. You can help the patient become more comfortable with setting his or her own agenda by asking questions like, \'93What is the main reason you came to therapy?\'94 or \'93What is causing you the most trouble right now?\'94 or "What are your most pressing issues today?" or "What are your thoughts about the focus of today's session?" It is also important to assist the patient in prioritizing issues on the agenda to give an acceptable amount of attention to each issue. After listing and prioritizing items, allot an approximate time to each item for discussion. Pay close attention to time management of issues on the agenda, and steer the patient away from superficial issues. As time passes, the responsibility of setting an agenda for the session should shift to the patient. This will eventually help him/her to set agendas, prioritize problems, and suggest interventions for issues encountered after completing therapy. This level of increasing patient responsibility also translates into his/her overall functioning by increasing autonomy of functioning as the patient works toward ending treatment. 37 Typical Session Outline 1. Briefly review patient\'92s mood and/or physical functioning (5 minutes). Elicit responses concerning the patient\'92s mood, and consider any and all discrepancies (e.g., change in strength or nature of usual mood, change from last week or beginning of treatment). Medically ill patients may benefit from regular assessments and updates on their physical health symptoms and functioning. Also ask the patient to offer explanations for mood improvement or decline. This brief update allows you to gauge how the patient is progressing and identify positive and negative change. If medication management or physician collaboration is part of the patient\'92s treatment, this is also a good time to check on any side-effects the patient might be having from medication and make adjustments as needed. 2. Bridge discussion from previous session with the current session (5 minutes). In bridging sessions, you are checking the patient\'92s understanding of what was discussed in the previous session. Reinforcing what the patient learned in past sessions is essential to the improvement that the patient makes outside the therapeutic relationship. Having the patient complete a Bridging Worksheet can assist in this stage of the agenda. Some issues discussed during this phase could become items on the agenda for the current session. 3. Set the agenda for the current session, and prioritize the items (5 minutes). First ask the patient what he/she would like to discus, and then offer an item. If a patient brings several agenda items, he or she might need to indicate which is the most important to discuss first. When a situation (e.g., fight with boyfriend followed by food binge) is offered by the patient as an item, you can use the situation as part of his/her agenda item, that is, as part of the skill being taught. For example, you can use the above scenario to teach/review a thought record. 4. Review any homework given in the previous session (5-10 minutes). Patients who do between-session homework show greater improvements than those who do not. To reinforce and troubleshoot between-session learning, it is important to review homework. Insession review serves two purposes: it reinforces the importance of homework and allows you to assess skill acquisition. If you identify errors in homework, you can use additional session time to review the skill. Reviewing homework can take a small amount of time; or it can take the entire session, depending on what the patient has learned from doing it and what difficulties he or she has encountered in completing it. 5. Discuss agenda items and set up homework (20-25 minutes). Discuss agenda items, starting with the first and most important. If you are running short on time, inform the patient that you will discuss the other items at your next appointment. Set up homework that is directly connected to what has been discussed in the session. 6. Summarize the current session and exchange feedback (5 minutes). Two types of summarizing are recommended. The first is a brief summary that should be done after the conclusion of each section of the agenda to reinforce what has been discussed. The second type is used to clarify and remind the patient of the thoughts he/she has presented and how those thoughts changed as a result of the exercise. It is important to use the patient\'92s specific words in summarizing his or her thoughts. At the end of the session, summarize the main points of the entire session. As the sessions progress, ask patients to do the summaries. Finally, exchange feedback about the session, skill, or progress of therapy. This is a time for you to encourage and motivate patients to continue working towards change. 38 Troubleshooting Agenda Setting In discussing agenda items, there are many pitfalls for a new CBT therapist. It is your responsibility to keep the discussion on track and focused. To prevent unfocused discussions, gently guide the patient back to the topic when he or she drifts, emphasize key emotions, beliefs, and automatic thoughts, and often summarize and rephrase what the patient says. You can also discuss at the start of therapy that one of your roles is to keep sessions on track; so you may, at times, need to shift the focus of conversation. Getting the patient\'92s agreement on this point at the beginning helps him/her feel more comfortable if you need to redirect or interrupt later in therapy. Pacing is also a concern for therapists, but prioritizing and collaboratively agreeing on agenda items and times can help you and the patient stay within the allotted time. Patients and therapists sometimes have difficulty setting the agenda together. Sometimes patients do not want to contribute to the agenda because of feeling hopeless or negative toward therapy. Occasionally, the patient may also be unfocused when setting the agenda (e.g., recount events of past week). It is often necessary to educate the patient about therapy by clarifying what kinds of issues constitute agenda issues and how session time may be optimally spent. CBT suggests that change involves skill acquisition and not simply identifying distorted thinking. Therefore, recognizing a distorted thought can be enlightening, but you should also use session time to teach skills to address the problem (e.g., thought records, behavioral activation) and not simply discuss the issue with the patient or offer advice. The process of skill acquisition is what sets CBT apart from \'93talk therapies\'94 (supportive therapy).}