{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2757
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Module 1: Introduction to Brief Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) Objectives\
 To understand CBT and the process of Brief CBT  To identify key treatment considerations and problems most suitable for Brief CBT.  To learn how to assess the patient\'92s suitability for Brief CBT What is Brief CBT, and why does it require specific treatment considerations? CBT combines cognitive and behavioral therapies and has strong empirical support for treating mood and anxiety disorders. The basic premise of CBT is that emotions are difficult to change directly, so CBT targets emotions by changing thoughts and behaviors that are contributing to the distressing emotions. CBT builds a set of skills that enables an individual to be aware of thoughts and emotions; identify how situations, thoughts, and behaviors influence emotions; and improve feelings by changing dysfunctional thoughts and behaviors. The process of CBT skill acquisition is collaborative. Skill acquisition and homework assignments are what set CBT apart from \'93talk therapies.\'94 You should use session time to teach skills to address the presenting problem and not simply to discuss the issue with the patient or offer advice. Brief CBT is the compression of CBT material and the reduction of the average 12-20 sessions into four to eight sessions. In Brief CBT the concentration is on specific treatments for a limited number of the patient\'92s problems. Specificity of the treatment is required because of the limited number of sessions and because the patient is required to be diligent in using extra reading materials and homework to assist in his or her therapeutic growth. Brief CBT can range in duration from patient to patient and provider to provider. Although variability exists, the following table shows an example session-by-session outline. You are encouraged to think flexibly in determining length of treatment. Time-limited therapy may offer additional incentive for patients and therapists to work efficiently and effectively. However, the exact length of treatment will likely be determined by a host of factors involving the therapist, patient, and treatment setting. As indicated in the following table, you are not expected to rigidly adhere to a "set schedule" of progress or topics but rather should be flexible and adaptive in approaching all brief CBT applications. For example, it is often helpful to work within a "session-limited framework" where the patient receives four to six sessions of "active" treatment, followed by one or more follow-up sessions that occur at increasing intervals after the active-treatment phase (e.g., 2 weeks post-treatment with an additional booster 4 weeks after that). \
7 Potential Brief CBT Session Structure:  \
Session 1: \outl0\strokewidth0 Session Content:\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Orient the Patient to CBT. Assess Patient Concerns. Set Initial Treatment Plan/Goals. \outl0\strokewidth0 Possible Modules\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 : Orienting the Patient, Case Conceptualization, Goal Setting \
Session 2: \outl0\strokewidth0 Session Content:\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Assess Patient Concerns (cont'd). Set Initial Goals (cont'd) \outl0\strokewidth0 Possible Modules\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 : Case Conceptualization, Goal Setting Or Begin Intervention Techniques. Technique Modules 9-13: Maladaptive Thoughts, Behavioral Activation, Problem Solving, Relaxation\
Session 3: \outl0\strokewidth0 Session Content:\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Begin/Continue Intervention Techniques \outl0\strokewidth0 Possible Modules: \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Technique Modules 9-13 \
Session 4\outl0\strokewidth0 : Session Content:\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Continue Re-assess Intervention Techniques. Goals/Treatment Plan. \outl0\strokewidth0 Possible Modules: \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Technique Modules 9-13 Module 4: Case Conceptualization Module 6: Goal Setting\
Session 5\outl0\strokewidth0 : Session Content: \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Continue/ Refine Intervention Techniques. Technique Modules 9-13\
Session 6\outl0\strokewidth0 : Session Content: \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Continue Intervention Techniques. Technique Modules 9-13 \
Session 7\outl0\strokewidth0 : Session Content: \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  Continue Intervention Techniques. Discuss Ending Treatment and Prepare Maintaining Changes. for Technique Modules 9-13 Module 14: Ending Treatment Maintaining Changes and \
Session 8 End Treatment and Help Patient to Module 14: Ending Treatment and Maintain Changes. Maintaining Changes \
\
When? (Indications/Contraindications) \
Certain problems are more appropriate for Brief CBT than others. The following table summarizes problems that may and may not be conducive to Brief CBT. Problems amenable to Brief CBT include, but are not limited to, adjustment, anxiety, and depressive disorders. Therapy also may be useful for problems that target specific symptoms (e.g., depressive thinking) or lifestyle changes (e.g., problem solving, relaxation), whether or not these issues are part of a formal psychiatric diagnosis. Brief CBT is particularly useful in a primary care setting for patients with anxiety and depression associated with a medical condition. Because these individuals often face acute rather than chronic mental health issues and have many coping strategies already in place, Brief CBT can be used to enhance adjustment. Issues that may be addressed in primary care with Brief CBT include, but are not limited to, diet, exercise, medication compliance, mental health issues associated with a medical condition, and coping with a chronic illness or new diagnosis. Other problems may not be suitable for the use of Brief CBT or may complicate a straightforward application of Brief CBT. Axis II disorders such as Borderline Personality Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder typically are not appropriate for a shortened therapeutic experience because of the pervasive social, psychological, and relational problems individuals with these disorders experience. Patients exhibiting comorbid conditions or problems also may not be appropriate because the presence of a second issue may impede progress in therapy. For example, an individual with substance dependence comorbid with major depression may not be appropriate because the 8 substance use requires a higher level of care and more comprehensive treatment than is available in a brief format. However, Brief CBT could be used with Axis II and comorbid patients in dealing with specific negative behaviors or in conjunction with more intensive treatment. \
How? (Instructions/Handouts) Therapist Considerations It is important to be adequately skilled to evoke change in a patient\'92s life in a short amount of time. You should periodically assess and seek supervision/consultation regarding your capabilities in the process and content of Brief CBT. The following are general therapist skills and abilities required for Brief CBT:  Capability to establish a strong working relationship quickly  Thorough knowledge of the treatments used  Skill in structuring sessions and homework material to address all problems  Skill in presenting material clearly and concisely with specific examples for each of the patient\'92s issues  Therapist interpersonal/personality variables: ability to be assertive, directive, nonjudgmental and collaborative Assessing the Patient It is necessary to choose patients who are appropriate for Brief CBT versus traditional CBT or other types of therapy. Below are important points to consider in selecting patients for Brief CBT. This assessment should precede the treatment phase and may be based on the intake assessment, input from the referral source, or a review of the medical chart. 9 Things to Consider in Evaluating Patients for Brief CBT 1. Strong Motivation to Change a. Increased distress is often associated with increased motivation to change. b. Positive treatment expectancies (e.g., knowledge of CBT and perceived benefits of treatment is associated with improved outcomes). Alternatively, the patient does not have negative self-thoughts that might impede progress or change (e.g., "Seeking care means I am crazy\'94; "Nothing I will do can change things"). c. Patients who have clear goals for treatment are good candidates. 2. Time Commitment a. Patient is willing to devote the time needed for weekly sessions. b. Patient is willing to devote energy to out-of-session work (e.g., homework). 3. Life Stressors a. Too many life stressors may lead to unfocused work and/or frequent "crisismanagement" interventions. b. Patients who are supported by family and friends are more likely to benefit. 4. Cognitive Functioning and Educational Level a. Not being able to handle the extra independent reading material and/or homework expectations may be a poor prognostic indicator. b. Patients able to work independently are more likely to carry out betweensession work. c. Patients who are psychologically minded are more likely to benefit from shortterm therapy. 5. Severity of Psychopathology a. Patients with comorbid psychopathology may be more difficult to treat in shortterm therapy. In addition, some conditions such as substance abuse or serious mental illness require focused and more intensive interventions. b. Patients with an Axis II diagnosis are also less likely to benefit from short-term CBT. Long-standing interpersonal issues often require longer treatment durations.}